[v12] refactor: enable all breaking changes (#1313)
callstack/react-native-testing-library: website/docs/MigrationV12.md

---
id: migration-v12
title: Migration to 12.0
---

> Migration to React Native Testing Library version 12 from version 11.x should be a relatively easy task due small amount of breaking changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React Native Testing Library 12 introduces a handful of breaking changes compared to 11.x. We believe they were necessary to improve the experience using the library and help the users fall into the pit of success when writing meaningful tests. You will find migration instructions for each and every change below.
```

Author: "help users fall into the pit of success when ..." 😂

Author: @thymikee Is this the pit you are referring to: https://blog.codinghorror.com/falling-into-the-pit-of-success/

Reviewer: c'mon

# Breaking changes

> 1. `*ByRole` queries now return only accessibility elements, either explicitly marked with `accessible` prop or implicit ones where this status is derrived from component type itself (e.g `Text`, `TextInput`, `Switch`).

Reviewer: Needs code example / comparison

Author: Added

You may need to adjust relevant components under test to make sure they pass `isAccessibilityElement` check.

> 2. `*ByText`, `*ByDisplayValue`, `*ByPlaceholderText` queries now return host components, as all other queries.

Reviewer: add comparison pls

Author: Not sure what do you mean by adding comparison here. I guess that in most cases this will not affect users tests, so there is nothing to show here.

Reviewer: Maybe that `returnedValue.type` is now always a string instead of a function for example?

Author: Yes, this is true, however we never encouraged users to inspect `instance.type`, as this is largely an implementation detail for the users.

Reviewer: We never did, but what's possible, is gonna be used eventually. https://www.hyrumslaw.com

> While potentially breaking, this should not cause issues in tests.

Reviewer: What if it does? Do we know how this can break and guide users on how to do it?

Author: Hontestly, we do not have a clear case when it breaks, as composite & host `Text` / `TextInputs` are very simillar in terms of props. For the types of test we recommend (query + jest matchers) it should work the same. The case where it might break is when user did e.g. explicit type checks, or inspects children, etc

Reviewer: > The case where it might break is when user did e.g. explicit type checks, or inspects children, etc

To me it's something that's worth mentioning

3. `container` API has been renamed to `UNSAFE_root`.

> Try using `root` API as a self alternative. The difference between these two propertie is that `root` will always represent a host component, while `UNSAFE_root` will typically represent a composite component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historically `container` was supposed to mimic the [RTL's container](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/api/#container). However it turned out not so relevant in RNTL's environment, where we proxied it to the underlying React Test Renderer's instance. In v12 RNTL introduces `root` API as an alternative that returns a host element instead of the full instance. The difference between these two propertie is that `root` will always represent a host component, while `UNSAFE_root` will typically represent a composite component of ReactTestInstance.
```

# Breaking changes

## 1. `*ByRole` queries now return only accessibility elements
`*ByRole` queries now return only accessibility elements, either explicitly marked with `accessible` prop or implicit ones where this status is derrived from component type itself (e.g `Text`, `TextInput`, `Switch`, but not `View`).

You may need to adjust relevant components under test to make sure they pass `isAccessibilityElement` check.

### Examples
Let's assume we are using `getByRole("button")` query.

Following elements will match:

```ts
// Explicit "accessible" prop for View
<View accessible role="button" />

// No need to "accessible" prop for Text, as it is implicitly accessible element.
<Text role="button">Button</Text>
```

While following elements will not match:

```ts
// Missing "accessible" prop for View
<View accessible={false} role="button" />

// Explicit "accessible={false}" prop for View
<View accessible={false} role="button" />

// Explicit "accessible={false}" for Text,which is implicitly accessible element
<Text accessible={false} role="button">Button</Text>
```

## 2. `*ByText`, `*ByDisplayValue`, `*ByPlaceholderText` queries now return host components

> `*ByText`, `*ByDisplayValue`, `*ByPlaceholderText` queries now return host components, as all other queries.

Reviewer 2: I'd have linked the testing environment doc that explains what host components are

While potentially breaking, this should not cause issues in tests if you are using recommended queries and Jest Matchers from Jest Native package. 

> Problematic cases may include: examining `type` property of `ReactTestInstance`, referencing other nodes using `parent` or `children` props, etc.

Reviewer 2: I feel like the most common case breaking will be reading element prop, which is not listed here and it's not clear that this particular case should be solved through usage of jest native matchers imo

Reviewer 2: Also it could be useful to mention that the parent of the element that is now returned is the composite element that was returned before v12 as it provides an easy way to fix broken tests at least temporarily

Author: Updated comments. I would not hint users about `parent` fix, as I think users are better by writing these tests in a recommended way.
